
---
creation date: 2023-03-20 14:51
last updated: 2023-03-20 14:51
---
# [[20230320145136_mfpca]] - Multivariate Functional Principal Components Analysis
__Tags__: #multivariate-functional-data  #functional-principal-components 

---
__Contents__: Multivariate functional principal components analysis is an extension of FPCA to multivariate functional data.

[[@ramsayFunctionalDataAnalysis2005]] propose to concatenate the vectors of function into one, perform a usual FPCA and separate the results. They remark that we can compute MFPCA for whatever using a suitable definition of the inner-product.

If the variability between the components is different, we should consider a normalisation of the components. And to visualise the results, we can plot variables against one another.

[[@happMultivariateFunctionalPrincipal2015]] propose a methodology for data defined on diverse domains. It is based on the relationship between univariate and multivariate decomposition. This can be applied to sparse and noisy data. It exists an equivalence between univariate and multivariate FPCA using finite KL expansion ([[20230327160843_karhunen_loeve_expansion]]). 

* Estimation of the number of components -> [[20230327162113_number_of_components]]
* Normalization as a preprocessing step -> [[20230328112124_normalization_multivariate_functional_data]]

**Questions**: 
* Robustify is the presence of outliers
* Extension to hybrid data

__References__:
[[@ramsayFunctionalDataAnalysis2005]] - Ramsay and Silverman - _Functional Data Analysis_ (2005)
[[@happMultivariateFunctionalPrincipal2015]] - Happ and Greven - _Multivariate Functional Principal Component Analysis for Data Observed on Different (Dimensional) Domains_ (2015)
