
---
creation date: 2023-03-30 08:53
last updated: 2023-03-30 08:53
---
# [[20230330085310_gap_statistic]] - The Gap statistics
__Tags__: #clustering #clustering-measure 

---
__Contents__: The Gap statistic is a measure of the within-cluster sum of squares distance compared to some reference distribution (as if there is no cluster) ([[@tibshiraniEstimatingNumberClusters2001a]]). It works with any clustering algorithm as it only use the distance between the data points and their estimated labels.

__Algorithm__: Assume that the data have been clustered in $k$ clusters.
 * Choose a distance between the observation (e.g. euclidean).
 * Compute the pooled within-cluster sum of squares distances
 $$W_k = \sum_{r = 1}^k \frac{1}{2n_r} \sum_{i \in C_r}\sum_{j \in C_r} d_{ij},$$
 where $C_r$ is a set of size $n_r$  that contains the observations for the cluster $r$.
 * Compute the Gap statistic
 $$Gap(k) = \mathbb{E}^\star[\log(W_k)] - \log(W_k).$$
 It compares the expectation from a reference distribtion to the observed values.
 * Then $K = \arg\max_k Gap(k)$ is the "best" number of clusters (actually, as the Gap statistic can be a strictly increasing function, we check that the Gap does not increase much from $k$ to $k +1$).

How to choose the reference distribution (null model)?
	For unidimensional data -> uniform distribution
	For multidimensional data -> uniform distribution with a shape constraint (based on PCA).

The expectation of the reference distribution is estimated by bootstrap ([[20230330091113_bootstrap]]).

It has been argued that using $\log(W_k)$ is the computation of the Gap statistic tends to overestimate the number of clusters ([[@mohajerComparisonGapStatistic2010]]). They propose to replace $\log(W_k)$ by $W_k$ (or by a weighted version).  

__Questions__:
* Can we directly use the Gap statistic in a functional data context? It seems to be true if we only replace the curves with their coefficients in the basis, cluster the coefficients and compute the Gap statistic on the results. However, we may lose some information. Considering a purely functional Gap statistic might be feasible. We need a functional distance (easy) and simulated with a reference distribution (not that easy, as the concept of distribution is not clear in FDA). An idea would be to generate data without cluster that have the same "distribution" than the considered curves.

__References__:
[[@tibshiraniEstimatingNumberClusters2001a]] - Tibshirani, Walther and Hastie - _Estimating the number of clusters in a data set via the gap statistic_ (2001)
[[@mohajerComparisonGapStatistic2010]] - Mohajer, Englmeier and Schmid - _A comparison of Gap statistic definitions with and without logarithm function_ (2010)

