---
category: zettelkasten
tags:
  - splines
creation date: 2024/02/26
Write article: false
Done article: false
---
# P-splines

P-splines are B-splines with a difference penalty on their coefficients. It aims to minimize the following objective function:
$$Q = (y - B\alpha)^\top W (y - B\alpha) + \lambda \lvert\!\lvert D \alpha \rvert\!\rvert^2.$$
The first term correponds to the B-splines basis ([[20240226145357_bsplines]]).
The second term corresponds to the penalty ([[20240227081543_penalty]]).

By setting the derivative, with respect to $\alpha$, of $Q$ equal to $0$, we find the unique minimizer
$$\widehat{\alpha} = (B^\top W B + \lambda D^\top D)^{-1}B^\top Wy.$$
Interpolation is performed using $\widehat{y} = B\widehat{\alpha}$.
Extrapolation is performed by adding pseudo-observations with zero weights in the model.

In view of the excellent interpretability of explicit coefficients, we should call P-splines a "proper parametric" model.

**Parameters**:
- Domain: the region of the $x$-axis on which the B-splines are defined. Should be at least $[\min(x), \max(x)]$ but it could be as large as we want, as extrapolation occurs automatically.
- Degree of B-splines: default is usually $3$, should probably be higher for derivatives estimation.
- Number of B-splines: the more the better, as the penalty removes any singularities.
- Order of the penalty: default is usually $2$, provides a good balance between smoothness and closeness to the data.
- Smoothing parameter: no default choice, may be estimated using CV and adaptive to the smoothness of the data.