---
category: zettelkasten
tags:
  - topological-space
creation date: 2024/01/17
Write article: false
Done article: false
---
# Neighborhood

Let $(X, \mathfrak{S})$ be a topological space. A subset $Y$ of $X$ is a neighborhood of a point $x \in Y$ if $Y$ contains an open set that contains $x$.

The collection of all neighborhoods of a point $x \in X$ is called a **complete system of neighborhood** and is denoted by $\mathfrak{N}_x$.

**Some properties:** Let $(X, \mathfrak{S})$ be a topological space.
- For each $x \in X$, it exists at least one neightborhood of $x$ (e.g. $X$).
- For each $x \in X$ and each neighborhood $N$ of $x$, $x \in N$ (by definition).
- For each $x \in X$, if $N$ is a neighborhood of $x$ and $N \subset N^\prime$, then $N^\prime$ is a neighborhood of $x$ (by definition).
- For each $x \in X$ and each pair $(N, M)$ of neighborhood of $x$, $N \cap M$ is a neighborhood of $x$ (considering open sets in $N$ and $M$, and their intersection).
- For each $x \in X$ and each neighborhood $N$ of $x$, there exists a neighborhood $O$ of $x$ such that $O \subset N$ and $O$ is a neighborhood of each of its points (considering an open set in $N$).

Statements about neighborhood in a metric space are not always true in a topological space. For example, given two distincs points $x$ and $y$ in a metric space $(X, d)$, there are neighborhood $N$ (resp. $M$) of $x$ (resp. $y$) such that $N \cap M = \emptyset$. Consider the topological space $(Y, \mathfrak{S})$, such that $Y = \{a, b\}, a \neq b$ and $\mathfrak{S} = \{\emptyset, \{a\}, Y\}$. The only neighborhood of $b$ is $Y$, thus, for each neighborhood $N$ (resp. $M$) of $a$ (reps. $b$), $N \cap M = N \cap Y = N \neq \emptyset$.